https://www.learndelphi.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/DelphiProgrammingForBeginners_ENG-CreativeCommons-LearnDelphi.org_.pdf

#delphi #beginner 
[[Handling a Button Press Event]]
[[Variables]]
[[Logical Expressions]]
[[IF…THEN…ELSE statement]]
[[Procedures]]
[[9 Functions]]
[[11 Loops]]
[[10 Graphics]]
[[12 Strings]]

[[17 Single Dimensional Static Array]]

# Delphi Programming for Beginners


> Delphi is an **Object Oriented Programming language**. 
> An **object** is a self-contained entity having properties (characteristics or distinctive signs) and a set of actions or behaviors. 
> The created object can be moved from one program to another. 
> Delphi includes hundreds of ready to use objects (**components**), which are presented in the Tool Palette. These components are grouped into the tabs


The main tabs of the Tool Palete are:
	1. Standard
	2. Additional 
	3. System 
	4. Data Access 
	5. Data Cоntrols 
	6. Dialogs


### Form window
Form window is a project for the future application.
Visual programming allows you to create programs by manipulating components
and plaсing them in a form.

WHen you first run Delphi, it automatically suggests a new project with the blank Form window.
It contains:
- a title
- buttons:
	- minimize 
	- close
	- maximize 
	- system menu

### Object Inspector
The window with components' properties is called the Object Insepctor.
Two tabs:
- all properties of the selected component
- events


### Saving the Project
>[!quote]
>Any Delphi program comprises a large number of various files such as the project file, one or several units, etc. The project file is generated by the Delphi environment automatically, and it is not available for manual editing. That is why it has a unique extension (*.dpr), and it is not displayed in the Code Editor.

Project should be saved using the Save All command.

> [!quote] Naming
> When renaming the files Project1.dpr and Unit1.pas, follow the Delphi code standard, according to which all files must have an XXX prefix — for example: prjMyTask1.dpr and untMyTask1.pas (ХХХ are letters corresponding to the abbreviated name of whatever you are saving: Project1 — prj and Unit1 — unt). This rule also applies when renaming simple components.

## Simple components
### Form
It is not in the Toll Palette.
A form is generated automatically when you create a new application.
You can add more forms to your project.
A form is like a canvas:
- you "paint" the grapical user interface of the application by placing componetns on the form,
- by changing the properties of components, you change their appearance
 
The form has some unique properties


Property **name** :
 - all componentents need to have a name
 - use ==a trigram prefix==  describing the componete's type; for the form, for example, we will use the prefix `frm` for the Form (the Form `My` ---> `frmMy`)
- 

### Label
It is used to output text that can be changed by user.
To create a label:
- In the Tool Palette double click on the icon *TLabel*
- in the Tool Palette one click on the icon and second click on the form

==property *caption* != property *name*==

### TEdit
It stores text that can be put into the component both during the creation of the application and during the execution.
The text seen in the text box comes from the property **Text**
**MaxLength** defines the maximum number of symbols in the text box (value=0 no limit)
**Font** property font text
**Text** property to set the displayed text


### button
TButton is usually used to start theexecution of some piece of code or the entire program. 
> [!important]
> Change the property Caption to &Run. Note that the letter following & is underlined (in this case it is R).
> Putting the symbol & before any character of the Caption property assigns a hot key to the button.

>[!quote]
>The symbol & is seen in the caption if the Caption property has two & together, i. e., &&. For example, to create the caption This & That, you write in Caption property This && That. Hotkey combinations are not assigned in this situation.
















