[[7 Types and TypeClasses]]

#### `type constructor = value contructors`
`data Car = Car {company::String, model::String, year::Int} deriving (Show)`
`data Car` - type constructor
`Car {..}` - value constructor
A value constructor can take some values parameterers and then produce a new value. In the example above value constructor takes three values and produces a car value.

## Type constructors can take types as parameters to produce new types
`data Maybe a = Nothing | Just a`
*a* is the type parameter (it could be `Maybe Int, Maybe Car, Maybe String, ..`)
**no value can have a type of just `Maybe`!!** because that's not a type per se, it's a type constructor

If we pass `Char` as the type parameter to `Maybe`, we get a type of `Maybe Char`. THe value `Just a` has a type of `Maybe Char`

The type that **has a type parameter** is the **list type** (`[Int]`, `[Char]`,...)

this type is correct and good:
```haskell
1.  data Car = Car { company :: String  
2.                 , model :: String  
3.                 , year :: Int  
4.                 } deriving (Show)
```

you can change is in that way:
```haskell  
1. data Car a b c = Car { company :: a  
2.                       , model :: b  
3.                       , year :: c   
4.                       } deriving (Show)
```
this is correct but have no sens

> In real life though, we'd end up using Car String String Int most of the time and so it would seem that parameterizing the Car type isn't really worth it.


>[!important] Whan use type params?
>We usually use type parameters when the type that's contained inside the data type's various value constructors isn't really that important for the type to work.
>	- A list of stuff is a list of stuff and it doesn't matter what the type of that stuff is, it can still work.
>	- If we want to sum a list of numbers, we can specify later in the summing function that we specifically want a list of numbers. 
>	-  Same goes for Maybe. Maybe represents an option of either having nothing or having one of something. It doesn't matter what the type of that something is.


Another example of a parameterized type that we've already met is Map k v from Data.Map. The k is the type of the keys in a map and the v is the type of the values. 

>[!info]
>So don't put type constraints into _data_ declarations even if it seems to make sense, because you'll have to put them into the function type declarations either way.


```haskell
data Vector a = Vector a a a deriving (Show)
vplus:: (Num t) => Vector t -> Vector t -> Vector t
vplus (Vector i j k) (Vector l m n) = Vector (i*l) (j*m) (k*m)
-- Funkcja main
main :: IO ()
main = do
  -- -- let car = Car {company="Ford", model="Mustang", year=1967}
  -- print $ car
  -- print $ company car
  print $ vplus (Vector 3 5 8) (Vector 10 20 30) 


output 
Ok, one module loaded.
Vector 30 100 160


```





